WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Good evening.
I'm William Brangham.
Judy Woodruff is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
dueling visions for the nation.
President Obama seeks to
preserve his legacy, as Donald
Trump lays out a very different
path forward.
Plus: The Greek island of Lesbos
is facing strained relations
with the refugees it once
welcomed with open arms.
ERIC KEMPSON, Volunteer: It
took so long to come here, and
they're sitting on the boat,
they're soaking wet,
they're freezing cold.
The temperature
is close to zero.
When you have a few people
holding two towns to ransom
because they don't want refugees
in there, this is
absolutely disgusting.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And
remembering George
Michael, the '80s pop star
and gay rights advocate
who died at age 53.
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: There is more
fallout tonight from that U.N.
Security Council vote on Friday
which condemned Israel's
building of settlements.
The Israelis confirmed today
that they have suspended working
ties with 12 of the nations
that backed the resolution.
Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu will not meet with
their foreign ministers, and the
Israeli foreign minister will
not receive their ambassadors.
Meanwhile, president-elect Trump
again tweeted his own criticism
of the United Nations this
evening.
He said, it has great potential,
but for now it's -- quote --
"just a club for people to
get together, talk
and have a good time."
And he added, "So sad."
Mr. Trump had urged the Obama
administration to veto the
Israel resolution, instead of
abstaining.
This has been a day of mourning
in Russia for the victims
of a military plane crash
that killed 92 people.
The plane went down Sunday
morning, just minutes
after taking off from
the southern city of
Sochi, en route to Syria.
Today, divers pulled fragments
of the plane out of the Black
Sea, and a massive search
operation continued
as investigators
searched for a cause.
MAXIM SOKOLOV, Russian
Transportation Minister
(through translator):
As we know, the main
causes so far do not
include an act of terrorism.
So we think that the reason for
the crash could be a technical
fault or a pilot error,
but I repeat it will
be clarified by the
investigation of a Ministry
of Defense special technical
commission.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The Russian
intelligence agency FSB said
today it has found no signs
pointing to sabotage
or terror in the crash.
In Syria, Russian troops
say they have uncovered
mass graves in Eastern
Aleppo since its recapture
from rebels.
The Defense Ministry said
today that several dozen bodies
were found, victims of torture
and mutilation.
The Russians sent military
police into Eastern Aleppo after
helping the Syrian government
retake the city.
And there's word that China's
1st Aircraft Carrier Group has
sailed past Taiwan and into
the contested South China Sea.
The Chinese warships passed
islands controlled by
Taiwan in a show of force.
Beijing says it's a routine
exercise, but it comes amid
rising tensions over Taiwan's
status.
The Philippines faced
widespread power outages
and evacuations today,
after a powerful Christmas
typhoon.
Typhoon Nock-ten made landfall
overnight, killing six people
and forced nearly 400,000
to flee.
Five provinces lost power
completely as winds of more than
100 miles an hour tore through
power lines and damaged homes.
WOMAN (through translator):
The water from the streets
became so strong, it came into
our house.
MAN (through translator): I
told my family to evacuate and
leave our belongings behind.
We needed to save
our lives first.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The
typhoon disrupted Christmas
celebrations in Asia's
largest Catholic nation,
and stranded some 12,000
holiday travelers.
Blizzard conditions in
the Dakotas kept major
highways closed today
and knocked out power
through Nebraska and Iowa.
Heavy snow, ice and winds
moved in over the Christmas
weekend, forcing authorities to
post several no-travel warnings.
Forecasters expect the
storm to move into the
Northeast later in the week.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the constant push and pull
between the current president
and the future one;
rising tensions on a Greek
island that's welcomed
thousands of refugees;
a deadly Christmas weekend
in Chicago; and much more.
It seems politics didn't
take much of a holiday break.
From the ongoing turf war
between outgoing President Obama
and soon-to-be President Trump
to a new pledge this weekend to
dissolve the Trump Foundation
over possible conflicts of
interest, there's plenty to
talk about this Politics Monday.
Joining me are Amy Walter of
The Cook Political Report and
Stu Rothenberg of The Rothenberg
& Gonzales Political Report.
Welcome to you both.
We have seen, over this weekend,
and in the past week or so,
president-elect Trump inserting
himself very overtly into
American policy on Israel,
on Taiwan and China.
He's negotiating
government contracts.
I'm curious, Amy, is this as
unprecedented as it seems?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: It is unprecedented.
But we, of course, have never
had a president-elect coming
in the age of Twitter either.
So there's that piece of it.
And I feel like a broken
record, but every time we're
together, I say the same thing,
which is we have to expect
that this is going to be an
unprecedented presidency.
He ran an unprecedented
kind of campaign.
He's been showing no
signs of being a different
president-elect than
he was as a candidate.
But I think he's also showing
us the kind of president that
he's going to be, especially
on an issue like Israel, where
he's going to move much closer
to where the hard-liners,
especially Benjamin
Netanyahu, want the U.S. to
be than where Obama was.
This is a relationship between
Israel and the U.S. during
the Obama years that hasn't
exactly been the
nicest and friendliest.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Stu, is that
your take as well, that this
is just the way it's going
to be?
STUART ROTHENBERG, Editor and
Publisher, The Rothenberg &
Gonzales Political Report: Yes,
it's a man with huge
personality and a huge
ego with lots of opinions.
And unlike traditional
politicians, all of our previous
presidents, he has a different
kind of filter or no filter.
And he thinks that, when he has
an opinion, he should offer it
and people would be interested.
And they are interested.
And I agree with Amy entirely.
I would expect this throughout
the presidency, at least over
the next couple of years, where
he likes to interject himself,
solve problems, make points,
and he will continue to do that.
AMY WALTER: And, look, there
is not really a distinctive
line between foreign policy
and other policies, right,
that when you're negotiating
trade, you can also negotiate
foreign policy and defense
contracts and where our
warships are positioned.
That's all part
of a big package.
STUART ROTHENBERG: And in terms
of the language - - just want
to point, just in terms of the
language, while politicians
use diplomatic language and
they are very concerned about
the words they use and the
phrases, Donald Trump is never
concerned about a particular
word or phrase.
He wants to get a point across
and he says it bluntly if
he wants to, and he usually
wants to.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Do you think
in the end, though, any of
this really affects policy?
I understand the appearance
of having an armchair
president in waiting.
Does it change policy
in any substantive way?
AMY WALTER: It will when he's
no longer the president-elect.
And so that's really
the question that we're
all waiting to see.
Right now, he sends out
his opinions, his tweets.
We see sometimes there is a
reaction, but nothing that has
been particularly substantive,
in part because we have
one president right now.
When he becomes the president
and he sends a tweet out, and
let's say warships move based
on that tweet, then we will have
a very different conversation.
Unless and until that happens,
though, we have to just sort
of expect that this is the
way he's going to
conduct himself.
And we're going to learn a lot
more once the people he has
hired, secretary of defense,
secretary of state, how they
perform and whether they have a
greater influence on policy, but
also on his behavior.
STUART ROTHENBERG: I would
say, for the near term, those
of us who read the tweets and
hear his opinions take
a deep breath, whether
we're journalists or
political analysts or
you run Boeing or whatever,
or international leader, but
there is a sense of let's wait
until after January 20 to
see where the policies are.
AMY WALTER: Right.
STUART ROTHENBERG: We know
where the opinions are.
Maybe the policies will
or will not follow that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Let's talk a
little bit now about the whole
conflict of interest issue.
We saw over the weekend the
Trump administration-to-be
is announcing that
they're going to close
the Trump family foundation.
Do you think that is going to
start to put to rest some of the
questions about his potential
conflicts?
STUART ROTHENBERG: Well, it's
a start, but I don't think
it will be the finish or is
the finish, and I don't think
he will be able to deal with
all the potential conflicts of
interests that he now has and
I think will continue to have.
He's not going to sell
all his properties.
His properties are
in many countries.
That raises questions
about foreign policy,
and relationships,
and economic issues.
I just don't see it.
So, is this a first step,
a significant first step?
I guess so.
He didn't indicate during the
campaign that he was willing
to do this, but I don't think
that solves the fundamental
problem, which is he's got a
lot of interests around the
world.
AMY WALTER: Yes, I
absolutely agree with that.
And it also takes
another political
headache off the table.
Remember throughout the
campaign, The Washington
Post had been reporting
on a lot of issues
with that foundation, where
it was getting its money, what
it was and wasn't doing with
it.
There is an actual open
investigation by the New
York state attorney general.
So it takes, at least in the
short-term, this political
headache, right, well, only just
giving me bad problems.
It's not a particularly
large foundation.
So, it takes that off the table.
Also gives him the opportunity
to say, hey, look, unlike the
Clintons, when it looks like
something could be pay for
play or there is a problem
with my foundation, I will just
close it down, rather than
making it -- or raising these
questions about conflicts.
But to Stu's point, there
are still too many other
conflicts that are out there.
And the question is, ultimately,
we know that reporters are
going to be interested in this
and tracking this
down consistently.
How focused will voters be on
this and how long will they
see each and every one of his
decisions impacting
his business?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That
always does seem to be
the ongoing question.
The AP, Lisa Lerer, had a really
interesting piece looking at
several of the things that
Trump criticized Hillary
Clinton for during the campaign
that he is now himself doing,
things like having a lot of
members of Goldman Sachs in his
inner circle, not having press
conferences, things like that.
Do you think that those
matter to voters, to
his constituency at all?
STUART ROTHENBERG: I don't
think they matter to Trump
voters, Trump supporters.
No, because I think they can
explain that away, it's the
media, it's misstatements by
opponents, it's
liberal Democrats.
So I don't think
that's a problem.
With the media, members of
the media will continue to be
interested in that, and will
continue to ask, when
are you going to have
a press conference?
But to Trump supporters, no,
I don't think it's a big deal.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
And I was sitting in a
focus group with voters
last week in Ohio who
had all supported Donald
Trump.
Now, they weren't all
hard, solid Republicans.
Many of them had voted for Obama
or Bill Clinton in the past.
But when you asked the question
about conflict of interest,
their answer, the way that they
helped to process this is
they said, look, he comes in
already very rich, so he can't
be bought off.
And you heard that a lot
on the campaign trail, too.
What they were frustrated
about with Hillary Clinton and
other traditional politicians
was that they came to Washington
and then got rich, as opposed
to they are already rich
when they came to
Washington, so of course
you can't be corrupted.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: He's
inoculated from it.
AMY WALTER: Right.
You can't be corrupted if you
already have all this money
and you are not looking for
the money.
We will see.
We will see how long it lasts.
Again, it's great in theory,
but to Stu's point, once it's
January 20, and you're president
of the United States and you're
making decisions, the lines are
going to get much darker and
much clearer.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Amy Walter, Stu Rothenberg,
thank you both very much.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Thank you.
AMY WALTER: You're very welcome.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Eighteen
months into Europe's
refugee crisis, tension
has surfaced on the
Greek island of Lesbos.
It wasn't so long ago that the
islanders were being considered
for the Nobel Peace Prize
for their welcoming of refugees.
But income from tourism,
on which many islanders
depend, has plummeted
this year, and hostility
towards refugees and to
the volunteers helping
them has only grown.
From Lesbos, special
correspondent Malcolm
Brabant reports.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Skala
Sikaminia, Skala Sikaminia,
a small fishing village
in northern Lesbos,
the tranquil dawn is about
to get busy.
The first raft of the
day has been spotted
about five miles away.
Volunteers from Refugee
Rescue, an Irish charity,
are scrambling to help.
The raft is intercepted by a
coast guard cutter after leaving
Turkey's shore and entering
Greek waters.
REV.
FATHER CHRISTOFOROS SCHUFF,
Lesbos: When it comes to the
fact that many of these people
arriving are Muslims, we are
supposed to love everyone.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Waiting
for them is Californian
orthodox priest father
Christoforos, who has
lived in Lesbos for 15 years.
At a time when Europe
is becoming increasingly
anxious about the influx
of Muslim refugees
and economic migrants,
Christoforos doesn't
waver from his creed.
REV.
FATHER CHRISTOFOROS SCHUFF:
Theologically, we are supposed
to see every human being as
God.
And how we treat that
person is how we treat God.
This a sacred ideal
to love the foreigner.
It is the exact
opposite of xenophobia.
This is something
which is sacred.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Mission
accomplished, 55 souls saved,
including 15 women and seven
children, most from
sub-Saharan Africa.
MAN: I thank God I'm here.
I'm so afraid.
MAN: We spent like four hours
to reach Greece territory.
Right now, I'm feeling cold.
MAN: Right now,
I'm feeling cold.
I'm not feeling right now.
WOMAN: I'm feeling proud
of the people I meet.
I'm proud of them.
Thank you plenty, plenty.
MAN: My life is in danger.
That's why I come here.
My life is at risk.
I'm running for my life.
MAN: You warming up now?
We will get you in 10 minutes.
We will get you into
the camp and you will
get some dry clothes.
MALCOLM BRABANT:
Where are you from?
MAN: Comoros.
MALCOLM BRABANT:
The Comoros Islands?
MAN: Yes, Comoros Island.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But
that's a paradise.
MAN: Yes.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Why
have you left a paradise?
MAN: It is a paradise,
but it's very poor.
It's very poor.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Like most
other Greek communities,
Skala Sikaminia has
endured seven years of
economic hardship, but
the selflessness of
the Nobel-nominated
villagers is one of the
reasons why Refugee
Rescue is based here.
Coordinator Baz Fischer.
BAZ FISCHER, Refugee Rescue:
There have been tensions in
other places, definitely.
And if we can, we'd always
like to bring them here.
If every village down the
coast was like here, it would
make things a lot easier.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This footage
was shot by activists at the
nearby port of Petra in the
summer, as local people
blockaded the jetty
in an attempt to stop
the coast guard from
transferring refugees in front
of their tourist beaches.
As a result of alleged
intimidation, including
vandalism of their
vehicles, volunteer groups
avoid Petra and Molyvos
five miles away.
With its magnificent 15th
century citadel, Molyvos is the
architectural jewel of Lesbos
and is almost entirely
dependent on tourism.
But according to Mayor
Athanasios Andriotis,
income was down by 70
percent this year, as
vacationers stayed away
because of the refugee crisis.
He acknowledged there
was some tension.
ATHANASIOS ANDRIOTIS,
Mayor of Molyvos (through
translator): The people
are annoyed and worried
about the future because
this situation seems to
be becoming permanent.
And it's one which is no good
for the people of Molyvos, nor,
unfortunately, for the refugee
migrants who come here.
MALCOLM BRABANT: There are some
people who say that the coast
guard has not been allowed
to drop people in Molyvos
because there is such hostility.
ATHANASIOS ANDRIOTIS (through
translator): The figures
here for tourism have dropped
to almost zero because
of the refugee issue.
This can't go on.
They have to understand that,
OK, they have arrived here,
but they have to go somewhere
else more secluded to disembark.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The consequence
is that it takes longer for
the coast guard or volunteers
to take migrants to ports
where they will be accepted.
This angers British
volunteer and Lesbos
resident Eric Kempson, who
we first met 18 months ago
and have since encountered
on several occasions.
He and his family have
repeatedly been threatened
because of his outspoken
pro-refugee stance.
ERIC KEMPSON, Volunteer:
This is very dangerous.
We are going to lose people.
You could see, it took
so long to come here,
and they're sitting on
the boat, they're soaking
wet, they're freezing cold.
The temperature
is close to zero.
When you have a few people
holding two towns to ransom
because they don't want refugees
in there, this is
absolutely disgusting,
absolutely disgusting.
People are going to die
here this winter because
of these few people.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Dimitris
Drakolias has been on
the receiving end of
anti-migrant hostility.
He runs a hotel in the
small resort of Petra.
Local hard-liners
blockaded the village and
whipped up an Internet
campaign after he agreed
to provide temporary
accommodation for
22 refugee children.
DIMITRIS DRAKOLIAS, Hotelier:
People got afraid that we were
supposed to bring refugees here
and stay for three --
two, three, four months.
It's a very
uncomfortable situation.
Nobody came up to me and do
anything, but I can understand
that they didn't like that
that I hosted 20 kids
inside the hotel.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Did
you feel intimidated?
DIMITRIS DRAKOLIAS:
A little bit.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The
hotelier says the Internet
campaign was orchestrated
by a tourist organization
called The Other Aegean.
We arranged an interview
with The Other Aegean's
chairman, Nikos Molvalis
(ph), who only wanted
to discuss the tourist
industry's 70 percent
losses and other problems.
We have been talking to the
owner of the Clara Hotel, who
says that your organization was
responsible for blockading
the place to make sure that
refugees didn't turn up there.
Can you explain that, please?
WOMAN: He doesn't want
to talk about that.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Why don't
you want to talk about that?
WOMAN: Because he's already
answered the question.
MALCOLM BRABANT:
Off-camera, Molvalis
claimed to have intervened
on behalf of the refugee
children.
Otherwise, he said there
would have been bloodshed.
REV.
FATHER CHRISTOFOROS
SCHUFF: This is not true.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The
tension troubles Father
Christoforos, who believes
some of the volunteers
don't fully understand the
plight of the islanders.
REV.
FATHER CHRISTOFOROS SCHUFF:
I see people are affected.
And I understand why
they are affected.
Their pocketbooks hurting
and they want to find
somewhere to put the blame.
But at the same time, a lot
of these same people will not
only blame the refugees or
the organizations, but they
also blame the government just
as much for not doing more.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The numbers of
people arriving on the islands
are just a fraction of the
thousands that were
landing daily when the
crisis was at its peak.
But there is a steady trickle,
and, slowly, slowly, the
islands are filling up again.
There's a serious shortage of
accommodation for these people.
And there's genuine concern
here that Europe's deal with
Turkey will break down, and once
again the islands
will be inundated with
refugees and migrants.
The influx increases
the pressure in Moria,
the overcrowded and
tense camp in the south
of the island visited by the
pope earlier in the year.
Frustrated migrants, angry
at conditions and the time it
takes to process asylum claims,
have, on occasions, set
fires inside the camp.
A Muslim charity has established
a feeding station just outside
Moria, claiming the camp
caterers are cheating
the residents.
MAN: Food in Moria, they
recook it three times,
two to three times.
This is what they say.
It's not eatable.
And they say it's dirty.
MAN: Moria, no good.
Here, good.
We want freedom.
Here, the food delicious,
and Moria not delicious.
MAN: Moria is like a jail.
Not good.
And the situation is really
bad, really a lot of problems,
calls -- every day fight,
every night fight.
MAN: Fire.
Fight.
A lot of problems.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Not everyone
is enduring spartan conditions.
Along with 200 other vulnerable
people, five members of the
Nikzad family are living in
a holiday hotel run by the
Catholic charity Caritas.
Sahil is desperately
missing regular school.
But in three months, he has
made good progress with English.
SAHIL NIKZAD, Refugee:
In Afghanistan, the
Taliban, I can't go to
school because explosions,
a bomb.
We want to go to some
good place, good country,
because,there, we learned
-- we go to school.
We have a good home.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Every
new arrival who survives
the perilous crossing
shares the same ambition.
As the numbers mount, their
chances of success diminish.
The warm welcome of Skala
Sikaminia goes cold as soon
as they leave the village.
The buzzword in Europe is
deportation, especially
after an Islamist
terrorist used a truck to
kill 12 people in Berlin.
This year, more migrants than
ever before died trying to
cross the Mediterranean to
Europe.
Yet still they come.
Father Christoforos may be a
lighthouse, but much of Europe
wishes that his beam would
be extinguished.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant in Lesbos.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
the legacy of pop star George
Michael; a conversation with
Israel's best-known novelist;
and a saxophonist describes what
he calls the music of freedom
and wonder.
But first: It was yet
another bloody holiday
weekend in Chicago.
Five more people were shot
this morning, bringing the toll
since Friday afternoon to nearly
50.
Eleven people were killed,
and Chicago is now set to
pass 700 homicides this year.
That's a level not seen
there since the late '90s.
Police said much of the violence
was clustered in areas with
historical gang problems on
the South and West Sides.
And police Superintendent
Eddie Johnson said at a news
conference today that the nature
of those disputes is changing.
EDDIE JOHNSON, Chicago
Police Superintendent:
Here's the bottom line.
Now, with the technology we have
in place, social media drives
a lot of our gang disputes.
They're on Facebook, on
Instagram, on Twitter
disrespecting each other.
They will live-stream
disrespects.
And when they do that, they
go out there and look for
them, and they get them.
So it's not just drugs anymore.
It's petty disputes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That
problem was one of several big
challenges that the "NewsHour"'s
John Yang heard about
when he reported there
earlier this summer.
He also examined what is
being done to combat it.
For some context, back
then, there were roughly
200 fewer homicides in
Chicago at that time.
Here's a second
look at his report.
JOHN YANG: On this busy street
corner in Englewood, one of the
hardest-hit neighborhoods on the
city's troubled South Side,
it looks like a party.
Kids are playing.
The grill is fired up.
In the past, though, 75th and
Stewart felt like a war zone.
TAMAR MANASSEH, Mothers Against
Senseless Killings: This
corner is a corner where a
man was killed -- well,
several men, a woman was
killed, and a child was killed.
A 9-year-old girl was killed
right across the street over
there washing her dog in broad
daylight.
JOHN YANG: But for two summers,
a group called Mothers Against
Senseless Killings, or MASK,
led by Tamar Manasseh, has been
out on this corner, and there
hasn't been a single shooting.
Volunteer Laura Lambert (ph)
comes from nearby Hyde Park.
And 91-year-old Edwina Knight
(ph) crosses the street every
day from the house she's
lived in for 57 years.
TAMAR MANASSEH: Just show up.
That's all you have to do.
Show up, grab a lawn chair
and a pair of sunglasses,
and you can do this.
You can change the
world with that.
JOHN YANG: But the moms of
MASK are only on one corner in
a city of 2.7 million people.
Killings have
spiked this summer.
Chicago has already recorded
more homicides this year than
it did in all of last year.
DR.
GARY SLUTKIN, University
of Illinois at Chicago:
This is also very
typical of all epidemics.
You can see the high
density of shootings.
JOHN YANG: University
of Illinois at Chicago
physician Gary Slutkin
says epidemic is exactly
the right word.
He argues that violence
is a contagious disease.
DR.
GARY SLUTKIN: For example,
you're exposed to flu, you're
more likely to get flu.
You don't actually get
flu without being exposed.
Same thing for T.B.,
cholera and violence.
I mean, why does someone
who was exposed to child
abuse, abuse their own kids?
That would be the person who
you would think would be least
likely to do it, because he
knows how bad it was.
But, in fact, he's
picked up this contagious
set of behaviors.
JOHN YANG: So Dr. Slutkin
treats gun violence as
a contagious disease.
He founded Cure Violence, now
an international effort that
trains former gang members and
felons to stop violence in its
tracks, violence interrupters.
DR.
GARY SLUTKIN: They are always in
the community, aware of what's
going on, and asking families
and people, you
know, who's upset?
You know, who is -- somebody
slept with someone's
girlfriend, someone was
disrespected, someone
owes somebody money.
And we can reach those people
with these health workers.
They may not look like
health workers to everybody.
They know how to cool people
down, know how to buy time,
JOHN YANG: Chicago violence
interrupter Chico Tillmon
knows how to cool people down.
He drove us around the South
Side last week, where much
of the violence happens.
CHICO TILLMON, Violence
Interrupter: In early January,
two cliques were arguing.
So one clique went into another
clique's neighborhood and got on
Facebook Live and was like: F.
you all.
We're in your all neighbor.
We're in your all gas station.
Within 30 minutes, on that
walk from the gas station back
to the house, two were dead,
one was wounded.
JOHN YANG: It's not like
this is a gang war over turf.
This is just sort of...
CHICO TILLMON: Interpersonal.
I said something you
didn't agree with, you
responded negatively, it
ended up in gun violence.
JOHN YANG: Violence interrupter
Ulysses "U.S." Floyd was a
leader in one of Chicago's most
notorious gangs, the
Gangster Disciples.
ULYSSES "U.S." FLOYD, Violence
Interrupter: I know I helped
start this mess, so I wanted
to help clean it up.
JOHN YANG: He told us that
gangs are very different now
than they were in his day.
ULYSSES "U.S." FLOYD: One or
two men control everything.
Now you have got a lot
of different little
gangs split all over.
They are offsprings of the major
gangs, what they call cliques.
And they just do
what they want to do.
Ain't nobody really in control,
no structure, no rules.
JOHN YANG: The number of
neighborhoods where Chicago's
branch of Cure Violence operates
varies based on funding.
But a Justice Department study
found that, at one point, the
group helped reduce violence
by 40 percent to 70 percent
in some of the areas
where they were operating.
Today, they are in only five
of the city's 77 neighborhoods.
On our drive through the
South Side, we saw children
walking home from school.
What do you think when
you look at kids that age?
CHICO TILLMON: I'm praying that
they survive through this --
through this epidemic that's
going on in the city.
It's not a Woodlawn problem.
It's not a South Shore problem.
It's everybody's problem.
And we don't understand that
until the disease hits home,
until one of our loved ones is
killed by gun violence.
Then we want to get involved.
JOHN YANG: Police have seized
6,000 illegal guns this year.
That's one every hour,
many from nearby Indiana,
where laws aren't as tough.
Chicago cops are feeling the
heat, a federal probe of the
use of deadly force and public
trust at a breaking point
after last year's release of a
dash-cam video showing a white
officer fatally shooting
a black teenager 16 times.
After another deadly weekend,
Superintendent Eddie Johnson
virtually threw up his hands.
EDDIE JOHNSON: It's
not a police issue.
It's a society issue.
Impoverished neighborhoods,
people without hope do
these kinds of things.
You show me a man that doesn't
have hope, I show you one
that is willing to pick up
a gun and do anything with it.
LANCE WILLIAMS, Northeastern
Illinois University: I
really see this problem
as a cultural problem.
JOHN YANG: Lance Williams
is an associate professor of
urban affairs at Northeastern
Illinois University and an
inner-city youth advocate.
LANCE WILLIAMS: This is not
a law enforcement problem.
I mean, you can hire all of
the police that you want.
You're not going to solve this
problem, because these young
men are acting in alignment with
their cultural value system.
They need a cultural
retooling process.
JOHN YANG: Williams says it's a
culture that's developed in the
absence of working institutions
and in the midst of
crushing poverty.
One big cause of
much frustration?
Nearly half of black men in
Chicago aged 20 to 24 are not
in school and out of work, far
higher than the national
rate of 32 percent.
LANCE WILLIAMS:
There's a lot of rage.
There's a lot of anger.
They just see their lives, you
know, just passing them by.
They don't -- they
haven't been to school.
They're not qualified for jobs.
There are no viable businesses
in their neighborhood, so
they're really depressed.
And then they're self-medicating
through drinking and drugging.
And the only individuals
around them are other
young African-American
males like themselves
who have these -- these
same forms of depression.
JOHN YANG: Another
structural factor playing
into the violence, Chicago
is one of the nation's
most segregated cities.
LANCE WILLIAMS: All of the
poor blacks live way, way, way,
way away from affluent people,
from the business district,
from the tourist district.
You know, you have some kids in
these neighborhoods far south
that have never been downtown.
Right?
And you have folks in the
white communities who have
never been to the South Side.
So, what happens is, you
have an out-of-sight,
out-of-minute kind of deal.
CHICO TILLMON: I was 23
when I went to prison.
JOHN YANG: For Chico Tillmon,
who spent 16 years and three
months in federal prison,
violence is never out of sight
or mind, turning other people's
lives around after turning
his own around.
CHICO TILLMON: Being able to see
all the violence and chaos in
the community that I once was
a part of, and that I once
helped produce, pushed me or
gave me an obligation to make
a change.
JOHN YANG: Since you
got out of prison...
CHICO TILLMON: Yes.
JOHN YANG: ... you got
your bachelor's degree.
CHICO TILLMON: Yes, sir.
JOHN YANG: You got
your master's degree.
CHICO TILLMON: Yes, sir.
JOHN YANG: You're
working on your Ph.D.
CHICO TILLMON: Yes, sir.
JOHN YANG: How long, how many
years are we talking about here?
CHICO TILLMON: Five years.
JOHN YANG: Pretty determined.
CHICO TILLMON: Yes.
JOHN YANG: Pretty motivated.
CHICO TILLMON: Yes, sir.
I got out with a purpose, and
I got out trying to not only do
something that was beyond what
I believed I could do, but to
inspire hope within all the
people that I left behind in
prison.
JOHN YANG: Back on the corner
of 75th and Stewart, Tamar
Manasseh is also determined
that change will happen.
TAMAR MANASSEH: It's going to
take a lot of people all doing
something, not saying something,
but doing something
to fix that problem.
And the doing something
is the sitting here.
It's the sitting here,
having a conversation.
I live on this block with you.
I live in this city with you.
I live in this country with you.
And we're all affected
by the same things.
And, sometimes, when we don't
talk to each other, when we
don't interact, we miss that.
JOHN YANG: On one
corner, a small effort in
response to a big problem.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm John Yang in Chicago.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As
a postscript to John's
story, there are some
more unfortunate numbers
to report.
This weekend's shootings brings
the overall total to more than
4,000 people shot in 2016.
Also, there have been
an additional 2,000
guns confiscated by
the police since John's
report.
The rate is about the same.
It averages a little less
than one gun confiscated
every hour this year.
Fans today are mourning the loss
of singer and musician George
Michael and paying tribute
to him as one of pop's biggest
stars of the '80s and '90s.
Michael shot to fame as a
member of the duo Wham! and then
launched a hugely successful
solo career.
His friend Elton John called
him -- quote - - "the kindest,
most generous soul and a
brilliant artist."
But, for all of his
success, Michael faced
personal struggles as well.
He died on Christmas Day
at his home in Oxfordshire,
England, at the age of 53.
Let's begin with this
remembrance by Angus Walker of
Independent Television News.
ANGUS WALKER: His songs,
his voice, his stunning
success, George Michael,
singer, writer, producer,
perhaps the perfect pop star.
Just 21, he wrote Wham!'s
breakthrough single, topping
the charts in the U.K. and U.S.
He and Andrew Ridgeley had
met at school near Watford.
Their brand of bouncy pop
was carefree, colorful.
Wham! soon sold more
than 25 million records.
World-famous, their crafty
manager secured a 1985 tour
to China, the first glimpse of
Western pop culture for
a country emerging from a
brutal cultural revolution.
His solo career began
with another number
one hit, new image, new
fans, multiple awards,
100 million records sold,
making him one of bestselling
artists of all time.
But it wasn't just his
music attracting attention.
After being arrested for a
so-called lewd act in a public
toilet in L.A., he responded
with a cheeky, defiant video,
came out as gay, speaking
openly about having hundreds
of lovers.
GEORGE MICHAEL, Musician: I
have been doing this on and
off since I was a teenager, and
never once seen violence.
I have not cheated or
lied about my sex life.
ANGUS WALKER: He also
admitted heavy drug use.
Arrested after crashing his car
while intoxicated near his North
London home, he was sent to
jail for eight weeks.
Five years ago, he came
close to death, spending
10 days in hospital,
suffering from pneumonia.
2016, another
superstar leaves us.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: One
of Michael's important
legacies over time was
how he eventually came
out and dealt with his
sexuality and identity.
Tim Teeman wrote about that
and more on The Daily Beast.
He joins me now from New York.
Tim, before we get into that
issue of his sexuality, I
wonder if we could just talk
a little bit about George
Michael as a musician.
TIM TEEMAN, The
Daily Beast: Yes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: When you look
back at his career, where do
you put him in the pantheon
of pop stars?
TIM TEEMAN: Oh, I put
him -- personally, I
put him right up there.
I mean, if you grew up in
England -- and I'm sure he was
very famous over here as well
with Wham! and later on as a
solo singer -- but if you grew
up in England in the '70s and
'80s, as I did, he, along with
Duran Duran and Spandau Ballet
and Culture Club, Boy George,
these were big, totemic
cultural figures.
And Wham!, as Angus Walker
described in his report there,
were -- they were almost the
harbingers, the heralds
of Thatcherism himself.
The group was very
anti-Thatcher, famously
anti-Thatcher, but
their brand of pop and
the kind of aspiration and
the brightness of that pop
was radical and revolutionary.
And Britain, at that point in
the early '80s, emerging from
a period of sort of late '70s
gray industrial decline,
this was the kind of pop that
heralded the big, brash '80s.
And look at George's hair, look
at his clothes in that time.
And those songs, you either
-- as I say in my article for
The Daily Beast, you either
hit the dance floor, and you
just flailed like a windmill
dancing crazily at them, and
then for the slower songs,
those slower songs still are
the songs that are at weddings,
the last song of the
night, people weeping on
each others' shoulder.
They are slow dances.
And they have remained.
And they have transcended.
If they were considered cheesy
-- and they were considered
slightly cheesy back in the
day -- they have stood
the test of time.
Look at "Last Christmas."
"Last Christmas" is
right up there with "Have
Yourself a Merry Little
Christmas" as a Christmas
cultural classic.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As we heard
in that report, George Michael
was rather rudely forced out
of the closet by this
arrest back in the '90s.
And up until that point,
he had been rather quiet
about his sexuality.
I wonder if you have a
sense of why he wanted
to keep that to himself.
TIM TEEMAN: I think, sometimes,
especially now, with the
acceleration of cultural change
and acceptance, as it's known,
I think we sometimes forget
what those times were like
back in the '80s and even
into the '90s, before he was
forced out of the closet.
These were not times of large
numbers of celebrities of any
kind out of the closet at all.
You might remember, in the
very late '90s, Ellen's coming
out over here was a big, big
cultural moment.
And so I sometimes think we
forget how, in those days,
coming out of the closet, if you
were famous, and, in fact,
coming out of the closet if you
were anybody was a very brave,
wonderful act.
Harvey Milk, the wonderful
Harvey Milk, had it
exactly right when he
said the most important
and wonderful thing an LGBT
person could do was come out.
It was the most powerful
statement they could make.
So, the interesting thing about
George Michael is that, yes,
he kept it quiet, though it
always -- I remember growing
up in the era of tabloid bait
and insinuation around stars
like George Michael
and his sexuality.
He did play equality concerts.
He donated and sang at
HIV and AIDS benefits.
While he was in the closet, he
fell in love for the first time.
And his first lover died
in 1993 of an AIDS-related
brain hemorrhage.
So he had a gay life,
and he was coming to
terms with something
himself in that period.
And he talked later on about the
complexity of his own sexuality.
Maybe he wasn't ready.
Maybe there were
commercial concerns.
But then, in 1998, as you say,
and as Angus Walker said in his
report that you just played,
came this arrest in Los Angeles.
And George Michael's completely
fantastic, wonderfully
defiant, mischievous response
to that, which wasn't the usual
contrite, yes, I have been
bad, I have a few personal
issues -- it was to release
a pop song which proudly
celebrated sexuality and also...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
This was "Outside."
TIM TEEMAN: Sorry.
This was "Outside," absolutely.
You're right, yes.
It was a song that not only
proudly celebrated sexuality,
but also proudly and defiantly
aimed itself squarely at law
enforcement, which famously
for years and years in your
country and in Britain as well
would entrap gay men in public
lavatories just to arrest
them, the use of
pretty policemen, we
called it in Britain.
And in this video, George
skewers it all and also, if you
listen to the lyrics, celebrates
defiantly his own
sexuality, which he spoke
about in later years.
He liked having public sex.
He spoke about it openly.
He had lovers.
He fell in love.
He had commitment issues.
He was horny.
He talked about all these things
in his song, and occasionally
in wonderful public interviews,
which I talk about
in my article.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You said that
the culture has changed quite
a bit since that notorious
arrest.
Do you think, if the next
George Michael is coming along
and knows his sexuality, that
he could be more comfortable
today being who he is?
TIM TEEMAN: That's a very
interesting question.
And I have been talking about
that with colleagues today.
I think we like to think
things have moved on.
And I think, for a certain level
of celebrity, I think things
have moved on, and I think
careers are continuing.
You look at Neil Patrick Harris,
you look at Ellen, there are
some people who are excelling.
And it's wonderful, and it's
a demonstration of how far we
have come and how far we like
to think we have come.
And then you look at the
top tier maybe of the music
industry and you look at the top
tier of Hollywood, and
there it remains, at
that very top tier, fear,
prejudice, a self-patrolling
closet on the part
of celebrities and
their representation.
And I think we have yet to
really breach that sort of top,
top, A-list film star, music
star moment.
It's happening.
There are more stars
out than ever before.
And we should be
happy about that.
I would hope, in the
future, that the example
of George Michael and the
openness and fierceness
and the defiance and the
mischief and the big smile and
the joy he took in some parts
of his life and what he tried
to convey to us in music and
how he spoke about it all
in interviews, I hope
that younger stars and
even established stars
who haven't felt able
to come out will look at that
and think, he did it, and he
did it with such style, and
such fierceness and with
such grace, let's do it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All
right, Tim Teeman of The
Daily Beast, thanks for
this lovely remembrance.
TIM TEEMAN: Thank you so much.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Now to
the "NewsHour" Bookshelf
for a novel about Israel
by its internationally
renowned writer, Amos Oz.
He joined Jeffrey Brown at the
Center for Jewish History in
New York, in a conversation
recorded before the recent U.N.
vote on Israeli settlements.
JEFFREY BROWN: The 1950s, the
early years of the state of
Israel, a time of hope for
Jews who'd seen a dream
come true, and fear about
what the future might bring.
AMOS OZ, Author, "Judas": This
is the period of my own youth.
And these were, in terms
of Israeli history, the
years of the morning after.
JEFFREY BROWN: So the country's
still young, but the question
is, what now or what next?
AMOS OZ: The question is what
now, but the question is also,
have we gone wrong somewhere?
Have we taken the
wrong turn someplace?
JEFFREY BROWN: Amos Oz was
born in Jerusalem in 1939.
He spent many years living on a
kibbutz, served in the Israeli
army, and eventually became
his country's best known writer.
His new novel, "Judas," his
first in more than a decade,
is set in Jerusalem in those
early years, the story of three
people at very different stages
in their lives and attitudes
toward the new state.
AMOS OZ: I wanted to explore,
first and foremost, how
three totally different
human beings lived
for three months in the
same room, change and
almost reshape one another.
JEFFREY BROWN: Do you start
with the notion of going back
to this period of what might
come next, or do you
start with the characters?
How does it happen?
AMOS OZ: Always
characters first.
JEFFREY BROWN: Always?
AMOS OZ: And I walk around
pregnant with the characters
for a long time before I write
a single sentence.
And when, inside my head or
inside my guts, the characters
begin to do things to each
other, what they do to
each other is the plot.
And then I can start writing.
What do we do to one another?
It's the one and only subject of
literature, if you really have
to squeeze it in a nutshell.
JEFFREY BROWN: Betrayal is
a key theme in this book, in
the ancient sense, through one
of the character's studies of
the biblical story of Jesus and
Judas, and in modern Israel's
founding.
JEFFREY BROWN: The
title is "Judas," right?
AMOS OZ: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: And this all
begins, I gather, out of an
interest of yours in the life of
Jesus.
AMOS OZ: Yes, but also out of
huge, growing resentment to
the ugly story about Judas,
about the 30 pieces of silver,
about the most notorious case in
history about the God killing.
In some point in the novel,
the protagonist, Shmuel Ash,
who is obsessed with his story,
he writes about Judas
hanging himself.
Thus died the first
Christian and last Christian,
the only Christian.
It's a very
provocative sentence.
It doesn't come from me.
It comes from the protagonist.
But it's trying to reconsider
the worst story ever told
by anyone in human history.
JEFFREY BROWN: Amos Oz has been
a strong critic of Israel's
occupation of the West Bank and
a longtime advocate for
a two-state solution
with the Palestinians.
That's made him a traitor in the
eyes of some of his countrymen.
AMOS OZ: I wear these as a
badge of honor, because it
puts me in wonderful company.
Many, many great men and women
in history, prophets, statesmen,
intellectuals, artists,
were accused of treason by many
of their own contemporaries.
JEFFREY BROWN: What is the
job or role of a writer
in a country like Israel?
AMOS OZ: I resent the
very term role of writers
or role of literature.
I'm sorry.
I think the right term should
be the gift of literature,
not the role of literature.
JEFFREY BROWN: The gift?
AMOS OZ: Yes.
Makes us look one more time
at some things which we have
seen a million times, and we
see them afresh.
Or, sometimes, it makes us
reconsider things that we were
sure we knew or we were sure
we were convinced of.
JEFFREY BROWN: But
is it different in a
country such as Israel?
AMOS OZ: I don't think so, no.
I don't think so.
I think literature is based
on the deep human need to hear
stories and to tell stories.
It doesn't have to
serve any other purpose.
JEFFREY BROWN: Oz's most famous
story may be his own, the
2004 autobiographical novel
"A Tale of Love and Darkness,"
which has now been made into
a film by the actress Natalie
Portman.
It's a tragic family story of
a mother who commits suicide,
leaving behind her young
son, and also a story of
a country in its early
years of statehood.
You have advocated a two-state
idea long before it was a
diplomatic solution, right?
Is that two-state solution dead?
AMOS OZ: I don't think so.
I don't see any alternative
to the two-state solution.
It is 50 years now
since I and a few of my
colleagues first advocated
the two-state solution.
Fifty years is a long time
in my life, but it's a
very short time in history.
Look, it's very simple.
There are two nations rightly
claiming the same tiny land.
They just don't trust the other.
There is a lack of courageous
leadership on both sides.
You know, it's like a patient
knowing that he has to undergo
a surgery, wanting to postpone
it because it's painful.
But the doctors are cowards.
They don't have the guts to tell
the patient, let's do it now.
The sooner, the better.
JEFFREY BROWN: You
still have hope for it?
AMOS OZ: Of course, because
I see no alternative.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, Amos
Oz, the new novel is "Judas."
Thank you very much.
AMOS OZ: Thank
you for having me.
Thank you very much.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
Finally tonight, another
in our music series.
Jazz musician Charles Lloyd
plays the tenor saxophone,
and he recently caught up with
"NewsHour" producer
Frank Carlson.
CHARLES LLOYD, Musician: In
my mind's ear, I have always
heard a beautiful sound.
And I keep, all my life,
practicing and playing,
trying to get close to it.
And, sometimes, the creator
will let me get just
so close, but it's like
the carrot-on-the-stick
phase, you know,
not yet, Charles.
I'm Charles Lloyd.
I have been drunk with
music all my life.
I was born in Memphis, and I
heard this beautiful music.
I would walk down the street in
my neighborhood, and coming out
of every house, I could hear
Billie Holiday, Lester
Young, Count Basie, you know,
Charlie Parker, on and on.
So, the music is
fueling the atmosphere.
Why jazz?
It's the music of wonder,
freedom and wonder.
And played by the great
players, the individual
truth, the personal truth
becomes the universal
truth.
What I have been doing
all my life is making
a parallel between the
beauties of the eternal
verities that come through
the music and spiritual life.
I think what we do is that
we come through here, we sing
our song, nobody knows us, and
we're gone.
But in the music, I can get up
there and find this paradise
that I'm trying to describe.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: On the
"NewsHour" online right now:
2016 was a year of much turmoil,
loss and division.
But as we prepare for
yet another trip around
the sun in 2017, enjoy
our list of undeniably
good things that happened
over the course of the year.
All that and more is on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Tuesday, we have the first
in a series of conversations
highlighting some of the
best in the arts in 2016,
including television,
movies and books.
Join us online and again
here tomorrow evening.
I'm William Brangham.
For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.